Content Delivery API article updates (#5167)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: 12/umbraco-cms/content-delivery-api.md

When upgrading an existing project to Umbraco 12, you will need to opt-in explicitly for using the Delivery API. Below you will find the steps you need to take in order to configure it for your Umbraco project.

> When you start with a fresh Umbraco 12 installation, the Delivery API will also be disabled by default. To enable it, you can proceed directly to the [Enable the Content Delivery API](content-delivery-api.md#enable-the-content-delivery-api) section, as the step below is already complete in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you start with a fresh Umbraco 12 installation, the Delivery API is also disabled by default. To enable it, you can proceed directly to the [Enable the Content Delivery API](content-delivery-api.md#enable-the-content-delivery-api) section, as the step below is already complete in this case.
```

```
{% endcode %}

Once the Content Delivery API is enabled, you will need to manually build the Delivery API content index (**DeliveryApiContentIndex**). It can be found in the "Examine Management" dashboard under the "Settings" section. This ensures that the data in the index is up-to-date and that the API is able to serve the latest content from the multiple-items endpoint.

### Additional configuration

> Once the Delivery API has been configured on your project, all your published content will be made available to the public by default. However, a few additional configuration options will allow you to restrict access to the Delivery API endpoints and limit the content that is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Delivery API is enabled in your project, all your published content will be made available to the public by default. However, a few additional configuration options will allow you to restrict access to the Delivery API endpoints and limit the content that is returned.
```

> Once the Delivery API has been configured on your project, all your published content will be made available to the public by default. However, a few additional configuration options will allow you to restrict access to the Delivery API endpoints and limit the content that is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Delivery API is enabled in your project, all your published content will be made available to the public by default. However, a few additional configuration options will allow you to restrict access to the Delivery API endpoints and limit the content that is returned.
```

The output produced by the Delivery API can either represent a specific content item or a paged list of multiple items.

{% hint style="info" %}

> Note that when referring to a specific content item in your API requests, the `id` parameter always refers to the item’s key (GUID) and not its integer node id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When referring a specific content item in your API requests, the `id` parameter always refers to the item’s key (GUID) and not its integer node id.
```

{% endswagger-description %}

{% swagger-parameter in="query" name="fetch" type="String" required="false" %}

> Structural query string option (e.g. "ancestors", "children", "descendants")

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to use inline code for these?

```suggestion
Structural query string option (e.g. `ancestors`, `children`, `descendants`)
```

Author: Yep, makes them more visible. Will fix 🙂

{% swagger-response status="400: Bad Request" description="Invalid request" %}

{% endswagger-response %}

{% swagger-response status="404: Not Found" description="Start-Item not found" %}

{% endswagger-response %}
{% endswagger %}

### Query parameters

> The Content Delivery API provides a number of query parameters that allow you to customize the content returned by the API to fit your needs. For each endpoint, the relevant query parameters are already specified within their corresponding documentation above. In addition to standard parameters like `skip` and `take`, the API provides several possibilities for the value of `expand`, `fetch`, `filter` and `sort` parameters. Below are the options supported out-of-the-box.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Content Delivery API provides a number of query parameters that allow you to customize the content returned by the API to fit your needs. For each endpoint, the relevant query parameters are already specified within their corresponding documentation above. In addition to standard parameters like `skip` and `take`, the API provides different possibilities for the value of `expand`, `fetch`, `filter` and `sort` parameters. Below are the options supported out-of-the-box.
```

{% hint style="info" %}

> You can extend the built-in selectors, filters, and sorting capabilities of the Delivery API by creating your own custom selector, filter or sort query handlers.

Reviewer 2: Shortened this sentence a bit, by removed the duplicate mention of "selector, filter and sorting".
Let me know if it doesn't make sense!

```suggestion
You can extend the built-in selector, filter, and sorting capabilities of the Delivery API by creating your own custom query handlers.
```

{% endhint %}

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="expand" %}
{% hint style="info" %}
Refer to the [Output expansion](content-delivery-api.md#output-expansion) concept for more information about the benefits of this parameter.
{% endhint %}

`?expand=all`\
_All expandable properties on the retrieved content item will be expanded._

`?expand=property:alias1`\
_A specific expandable property with the property alias `alias1` will be expanded._

`?expand=property:alias1,alias2,alias3`\

> _Several expandable properties with the specified property aliases will be expanded._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Different expandable properties with the specified property aliases will be expanded._
```

`?filter=contentType:alias`\
_This filter restricts the results to only include content items that belong to the specified content type. Replace `alias` with the alias of the content type you want to filter by._

`?filter=name:nodeName`\
_When this filter is applied, only content items whose name matches the specified value will be returned. Replace `nodeName` with the name of the item that you want to filter by._

Additionally, filters support negation. By using an exclamation mark (`!`) before the filter value, you can exclude content items from the result set that match the filter criteria. For example, to fetch all content items except those with the content type `article`, you can use the filter parameter like this: `?filter=contentType:!article`.

Multiple filters can be applied to the same request in addition to other query parameters:

**Request**

```http
GET /umbraco/delivery/api/v1/content?filter=contentType:article&filter=name:guide&skip=0&take=10
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="sort" %}

> Specifying how the results should be ordered, can be achieved using the `sort` query option. You can use this parameter to sort the content items by various fields, including create date, level, name, sort order, and update date. For each field, you can specify whether the items should be sorted in ascending (_asc_) or descending (_desc_) order. Without a `sort` query parameter, the order of the results will be determined by the relevance score of the **DeliveryApiContentIndex** for the given search term.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Specifying how the results should be ordered, can be achieved using the `sort` query option. You can use this parameter to sort the content items by different fields, including create date, level, name, sort order, and update date. For each field, you can specify whether the items should be sorted in ascending (_asc_) or descending (_desc_) order. Without a `sort` query parameter, the order of the results will be determined by the relevance score of the **DeliveryApiContentIndex** for the given search term.
```

`?sort=createDate:asc/desc`\
_An option to sort the results based on the creation date of the content item in either `asc` or `desc` order._

`?sort=level:asc/desc`\
_An option to sort the results based on the level of the content item in the content tree in either `asc` or `desc` order._

`?sort=name:asc/desc`\
_An option to sort the results based on the name of the content item in either `asc` or `desc` order._

`?sort=sortOrder:asc/desc`\
_An option to sort the results based on the sort order of the content item in either `asc` or `desc` order._

`?sort=updateDate:asc/desc`\
_An option to sort the results based on the last update date of the content item in either `asc` or `desc` order._

> Several sorting options can be combined for the `/umbraco/delivery/api/v1/content` endpoint, allowing for more advanced sorting functionality. Here is an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Different sorting options can be combined for the `/umbraco/delivery/api/v1/content` endpoint, allowing for more advanced sorting functionality. Here is an example:
```
